Adobe Systems Incorporated's Portable Document Format (PDF) is the de facto
standard for the accurate, reliable, and platform-independent representation of a
paged document. It's the only universally accepted file format that allows pixel-perfect
layouts. In addition, PDF supports user interaction and collaborative workflows that
are not possible with printed documents.
PDF documents have been in widespread use for years, and dozens of free and
commercial PDF readers, editors, and libraries are readily available. However, despite
this popularity, it's still difficult to find a succinct guide to the native PDF format.
Understanding the internal workings of a PDF makes it possible to dynamically
generate PDF documents. For example, a web server can extract information from a
database, use it to customize an invoice, and serve it to the customer on the fly.

The PDF Standard
The PDF format is an open standard maintained by the International Organization for
Standardization. The official specification is defined in ISO 32000-1:2008, but Adobe
also provides a free, comprehensive guide called PDF Reference, Sixth Edition,
version 1.7.

Chapter 1 Conceptual Overview
We'll begin with a conceptual overview of a simple PDF document. This chapter is
designed to be a brief orientation before diving in and creating a real document from
scratch.
A PDF file can be divided into four parts: a header, body, cross-reference table, and
trailer. The header marks the file as a PDF, the body defines the visible document, the
cross-reference table lists the location of everything in the file, and the trailer provides
instructions for how to start reading the file.

Header
The header is simply a PDF version number and an arbitrary sequence of binary data.
The binary data prevents naïve applications from processing the PDF as a text file.
This would result in a corrupted file, since a PDF typically consists of both plain text
and binary data (e.g., a binary font file can be directly embedded in a PDF).

Body
The body of a PDF contains the entire visible document. The minimum elements
required in a valid PDF body are:
1. A page tree
2. Pages
3. Resources
4. Content
5. The catalog
The page tree serves as the root of the document. In the simplest case, it is just a list
of the pages in the document. Each page is defined as an independent entity with
metadata (e.g., page dimensions) and a reference to its resources and content, which
are defined separately. Together, the page tree and page objects create the "paper"
that composes the document.
Resources are objects that are required to render a page. For example, a single font
is typically used across several pages, so storing the font information in an external
resource is much more efficient. A content object defines the text and graphics that
actually show up on the page. Together, content objects and resources define the
appearance of an individual page.
Finally, the document's catalog tells applications where to start reading the document.
Often, this is just a pointer to the root page tree.

Cross-Reference Table
After the header and the body comes the cross-reference table. It records the byte
location of each object in the body of the file. This enables random-access of the
document, so when rendering a page, only the objects required for that page are read
from the file. This makes PDFs much faster than their PostScript predecessors, which
had to read in the entire file before processing it.

Trailer
Finally, we come to the last component of a PDF document. The trailer tells
applications how to start reading the file. At minimum, it contains three things:
1. A reference to the catalog which links to the root of the document.
2. The location of the cross-reference table.
3. The size of the cross-reference table.
Since a trailer is all you need to begin processing a document, PDFs are typically
read back-to-front: first, the end of the file is found, and then you read backwards until
you arrive at the beginning of the trailer. After that, you should have all the information
you need to load any page in the PDF.

Summary
To conclude our overview, a PDF document has a header, a body, a cross-reference
table, and a trailer. The trailer serves as the entryway to the entire document, giving
you access to any object via the cross-reference table, and pointing you toward the
root of the document. The relationship between these elements is shown in the
following figure.

Chapter 2 Building a PDF
PDFs contain a mix of text and binary, but it’s still possible to create them from scratch
using nothing but a text editor and a program called pdftk. You create the header, body,
and trailer on your own, and then the pdftk utility goes in and fills in the binary blanks for
you. It also manages object references and byte calculations, which is not something
you would want to do manually.
First, download pdftk from PDF Labs. For Windows users, installation is as simple as
unzipping the file and adding the resulting folder to your PATH. Running pdftk --help
from a command prompt should display the help page if installation was successful.
Next, we’ll manually create a PDF file for use with pdftk. Create a plain text file called
hello-src.pdf (this file is available at https://bitbucket.org/syncfusion/pdf-succinctly) and
open it in your favorite text editor.

Header
We’ll start by adding a header to hello-src.pdf. Remember that the header contains
both the PDF version number and a bit of binary data. We’ll just add the PDF version
and leave the binary data to pdftk. Add the following to hello-src.pdf.

%PDF-1.0

The % character begins a PDF comment, so the header is really just a special kind of
comment.

Body
The body (and hence the entire visible document) is built up using objects. Objects are
the basic unit of PDF files, and they roughly correspond to the data structures of popular
programming languages. For example, PDF has Boolean, numeric, string, array, and
dictionary objects, along with streams and names, which are specific to PDF. We’ll take
a look at each type as the need arises.

The Page Tree
The page tree is a dictionary object containing a list of the pages that make up the
document. A minimal page tree contains just one page.

1 0 obj
<< /Type /Pages
/Count 1
/Kids [2 0 R]
>>
endobj

Objects are enclosed in the obj and endobj tags, and they begin with a unique
identification number (1 0). The first number is the object number, and the second is the
generation number. The latter is only used for incremental updates, so all the generation
numbers in our examples will be 0. As we’ll see in a moment, PDFs use these identifiers
to refer to individual objects from elsewhere in the document.
Dictionaries are set off with angle brackets (<< and >>), and they contain key/value
pairs. White space is used to separate both the keys from the values and the items from
each other, which can be confusing. It helps to keep pairs on separate lines, as in the
previous example.
The /Type, /Pages, /Count, and /Kids keys are called names. They are a special
kind of data type similar to the constants of high-level programming languages. PDFs
often use names as dictionary keys. Names are case-sensitive.
2 0 R is a reference to the object with an identification number of 2 0 (it hasn’t been
created yet). The /Kids key wraps this reference in square brackets, turning it into an
array: [2 0 R]. PDF arrays can mix and match types, so they are actually more like
C#’s List<object> than native arrays.
Like dictionaries, PDF arrays are also separated by white space. Again, this can be
confusing, since the object reference is also separated by white space. For example,
adding a second reference to /Kids would look like: [2 0 R 3 0 R] (don’t actually
add this to hello-src.pdf, though).